# Crypto 101: A Gentle Introduction to Cryptography

This is the introduction in what will be a series of articles diving into different types of cryptography, how 
they work, and what they are used for to build some fundamental knowledge for future articles.  This first piece
 will focus on the social and ethical implications of common citizens empowered by freely available encryption 
 hat cannot feasibly be cracked within our lifetimes.

1. How do we know the government can't listen in on things?
If the leaks by Edward Snowden and previous whistleblowers have taught us anything, large governments have a 
tendency to want to accumulate any data they can about their citizens in the name of national defense.  Luckily 
for us, thanks to the work of people like Phil Zimmerman, inventor of PGP (Pretty Good Privacy), freely 
available technology exists to encrypt our communications.  This fundamental technology helps us make sure we 
know no one gets our credit card information can be recorded in transit to the store we pay and shield 
communications from the prying Eye of Sauron.  This type of guarantee sounds great, but how do we know our 
information is safe from wiretapping by ciminals?  

  1. No magic in how it works
  2. Prime number factorization problem as example
    - Easy to multiply two primes, hard to find the two primes multiplied to get a number

For starters, modern cryptography has no unknowns in how it works, and cryptographers have figured out exactly 
why it cannot be cracked.  There are some assumptions that crypto is based on.  For example, public key crypto 
is based on the multiplication of two very large prime numbers.  We're talking hundreds of digits.  The reason 
this works is because it's very fast for computers to multiply numbers.  Now you have this huge number that's 
twice as long as the two primes you multiplied together.  The problem of figuring out the initial two primes 
from the product is a mathematical problem that doesn't have any shortcuts other than to start guessing.  To 
oversimplify, much of crypto involves "one way functions" like this.  It's easy in one direction, prohibitively 
hard to reverse engineer how you got the result.  

The sole reason crypto is hard to crack is because of how mathematically infeasible it is to do something.  And 
the cryptographers of the world have poked, prodded, and beaten these algorithms to find any weaknesses in them 
that can beat and easily decrypted.  Because of this, we can assume (if the NSA doesn't have some super secret 
method the mathematicians of the world haven't figured out) that our crypto is secure.  

  3. Ethical concerns

Crypto is a fantastic thing for us, from making it possible to buy things online privately to keeping 
eavedroppers out of our conversations, but it's time to play Devil's Advocate.  What about terrorists using this
 technology?  They are certainly able to use this technology the same way as you or I, but what exactly can be 
 done about it?  Pandora's Box is already open and free crypto tools are long since loose in the world.  

We have seen the political reactions like trying to legislate weakness in encryption we all rely on to keep 
ourselves secure.  If that happens, it won't change what the terrorists use because it's already out in the 
world.  You cannot legislate against technology.  It's akin to a force of nature.  You can try telling people to 
not use something exists and is freely available, but good luck enforcing it.  

2. Typical uses for Cryptography
   - VPNs
   - Credit card information for eCommerce
   - Digital Rights Management
   - Digital signing to validate text
     - Touch on what authentication is, why it's useful


3. Steps you can take right now to take advantage of encryption for privacy
  - Start using Signal for messaging
  - Use 2-factor authentication (not with SMS!)


- Potentially add glossary for the uninitiated defining bits, bytes, hex, and maybe a few other building block pieces of vocabulary, depending on what comes up